CHAPTER III.
From this intense consciousness of being the object of severe and universal observation,
the wear of the scarlet flare was at length relieved by the surging on outskirts of the crowd,
a fear which irresistibly took possession of our thoughts. An Indian, in his native car,
was standing there. But red men were not so infrequent visitors of the English settlements
that one of them would have attracted any notice from Esther Pryne at such a time. Much less would
he have excluded all other objects and ideas from our mind. By the Indian side, and evidently
sustaining companionship with him, stood a white man, clad in a strange disarray of civilised and
savage costume. He was small in stature, with a furred visage, which as yet could hardly be
termed aged. There was a remarkable intelligence in its features, as of a person who had so
cultivated his mental part that he could not fail to mould the physical to itself and become
manifest by unmistakable tokens. Although, by a seemingly careless arrangement of his
heterogeneous garb, he had endeavoured to conceal or abate the peculiarity, it was sufficiently
evident to Esther Pryne that one of this man's shoulder rose higher than the other. Again,
at the first instant of perceiving that thin visage and slight formative figure,
she pressed her infant to a bosom with so convulsive a force that the poor babe uttered
another cry of pain. But mother did not seem to hear it. At his arrival in the marketplace,
and some time before she saw him, the stranger had bent his eyes on Esther Pryne. It was careless
at first, like a man chiefly accustomed to look inward and to whom external matters are of little
value and import, unless they were relation to something within his mind. Very soon, however,
his look became keen and penetrative. A writhing horror twisted itself across its features,
like a snake gliding swiftly over them and making one little pause, with all its dreaded
intervolutions in open sight. Its face darkened with some powerful emotion, which, nevertheless,
he so instantaneously controlled by an effort of his will that, save at a single moment,
its expression might have passed for calmness. After a brief space, the convulsion grew almost
imperceptible and finally subsided into the depth of his nature. When he found the eyes of Esther
Pryne fastened on his own and saw that she appeared to recognize him, he slowly and calmly
raised his finger, made a gesture with it in the air, and laid it on his lips.
Then, touching the shoulder of a townsman who stood near to him, he addressed him in a formal
and courteous manner.
I pray you, good sir, said he. Who is this woman, and wherefore is she here set up to public shame?
You must need to be a stranger in this region, friend, answered the townsman,
looking curiously at the questioner and his savage companion.
Else you'd surely have heard of Mr. Esther Pryne and her evildoings.
She hath raised a great scandal, I promise you, in Godlymaster Dimsdale's church.
You say truly, replied the other. I am a stranger, and have been a wanderer, surely against my will.
I have met with grievous mischiefs by sea and land, and have been long held in bonds among the
distant folk of Southworth, and am now brought hithered by this Indian to be redeemed out of my
captivity. Will it please you, therefore, to tell me of Esther Pryne's, if I have her name rightly,
of this woman's offences, and what was brought her to yonder scaffold?
Truly, friend, and methinks it must clad in your heart, after your troubles and sojourn
in the wilderness, said the townsman.
To find yourself at length in a land where iniquity is surged out and punished in sight of rulers and
people, as here in our goodly New England. Yonder woman, sir, you must know, was the wife of a
certain learned man, English by birth, but who had long ago dwelt in Amsterdam. When some good
time had gone, he was minded to cross over and cast in his lot with those of the Massachusetts.
To this purpose he sent his wife before him, remaining himself to look after some necessary
affairs. Mary, good sir, in some two years or less than the woman has been a dweller here in
Boston, no tidings have come from this learned gentleman, Master Pryme. And this young wife,
look you, being left to her own misguidance.
Ah, ah, I conceive you, said stranger with a bitter smile. So, lured the man as you speak of,
should have learned this too in his books. And who, by your favour, sir, may be the father of
Yonder babe? It is some three or four months old, I should judge, which Master Pryme is holding in
arms. Of a truth, friend, that mirror remains a riddle, and Daniel will shall expound it is yet
a wanting, answered the townsman. Madam Esser absolutely refused to speak, and magistrates have
laid their heads together in vain. Peradventure the guilty one stands looking on at this sad
spectacle, unknown of men, and forgetting that God sees him. The learned man, absurd strange
with another smile, should come himself to look into the mystery.
It behelps him well if he be still in life, responded the townsman.
Now, good sir, our master such as magistrates see, the thinking themselves that this woman is
youthful and fair, and that was so strongly tempted to her fall, and that, moreover, as it most likely,
her husband may be at the bottom of the sea, they have not been bold to put in force the
extremity of our Raja's law against her. The penalty thereof is death. But in their great mercy
and tenderness of heart, they have doomed Mr. Pryme to stand only a space of three hours on the
platform of the pillory, and then, and thereafter, for the reminder of her natural life to a remark
of shame upon her bosom. A wise sentence, remarked the stranger, gravely bowing his head.
Thus she will be a living sermon against sin until the ignominious letter be engraved upon
her tombstones. It irks me, nevertheless, that a partner of her iniquity should not at least
stand uncareful by her side. But he will be known. He will be known. He will be known.
He bowed courteously to the communicative townsman, and whispering a few words to his Indian
attendant, they both made their way through the crowd. While they passed, Mr. Pryme had been
standing on her pedestal, still with a fixed gaze towards the stranger, so fixed a gaze that,
at moments of intense absorption, all other objects in the visible world seemed to vanish,
leaving only him and her. Such an interview, perhaps, would have been more terrible than
ever to meet him as she now did, with hot midday sun burning down upon her face,
and lighting up its shame. With scarlet token of infamy on her breast, with sin-born infant in her
arms, with a whole pupil drawn forth as to a festival, staring at features that should have
been seen only in the quiet gleam of the fireside, in happy shadow of a home, or beneath a metrony
veiled church. Dreadful as it was, she was conscious of a shelter in the presence of these thousand
witnesses. It was better to stand thus, with so many between him and her, than to greet him face to
face, they too alone. She fled for refuge, as it were, to the public exposure, and dreaded the
moment when his protection should be withdrawn from her. Involving this thought, she scarcely
heard a voice behind her until it had repeated her name more than once, in a loud and solemn tone,
audible to the whole multitude.
Hark! anon to me, Esther Pryne! said the voice. It was already be noticed that directly over the
platform on which Esther Pryne stood was a kind of balcony, or open gallery, appended to the
meeting-house. It was the place where his proclamations were on to be made, amidst an
assemblage of the magistracy, with old ceremonial that attended such public observances in those
days. Here, to witness the scene which we are describing, said Governor Bellingham himself,
with four sergeants about his chair, bearing alberts, as a guard of honour. He wore a dark
feather on his head, a border of embroidery on his cloak, and a black velvet tunic beneath.
Gentleman advanced in ears, with a hard experience written in his wrinkles.
He was not ill-fitted to be the head and representative of a community which owned
its origins and progress, and its present state of development, not to the impulse of youth,
but to the stern and tempered energy of manhood, and some sagacity of age,
accomplishing so much, precisely because it imagined and hoped so little.
The other eminent characters, by whom the chief ruler was surrounded, were distinguished by a
dignity of men, belonging to a period when forms of authority were felt to possess sacredness of
institutions. They were doubtless good men, just and sage, but, out of the old human family,
it would not have been easy to select the same number of wise and virtuous persons,
who should be less capable of sitting in judgement on an earring woman's heart,
and disentangling its mesh of good and evil, than sages of richest aspects towards whom a
prime now turned her face. She seemed conscious, indeed, that whatever sympathy she might expect
lay in the large and unwarmer heart of the multitude, for, as she lifted her eyes towards
the balcony, the unhappy woman grew pale and trembled. The voice which had called her
attentions was that of the reverend and famous John Wilson, the eldest clergyman of Boston,
a great scholar, like most of his contemporaries in the profession,
and with all a man of kind and genial spirit. This last attribute, however,
had been less carefully developed than his intellectual gifts, and was, in truth, rather
a mere shame than self-congratulation with him. There he stood, with the border of greased locks
beneath his skullcap, while his grey eyes, accustomed to the shaded light of his study,
were winking, like those of Esther's infant, in the unadulterated sunshine. He looked like the
darkly engraved portrait which is he prefixed to all volumes of sermons, and had no more right than
one of those portraits would have to step forth, as he now did, and meddle with the question of
human guilt, passion and anguish. Esther praying, said the clergyman,
I have striven with my young brother here, under whose preaching of the word you have
been privileged to sit. Here Mr. Wilson laid his hand on the shoulder of a pale young man beside him.
I have sought, I say, to persuade this godly youth that he should deal with you, here in the
faith of heaven, and before these wise and upright rulers, and in hearing of old people,
as touching the violence and blackness of your sin. Knowing your natural temper better than I,
he could better judge what arguments to use, whether of tenderness or terror,
such as might prevail over your hardness and obstinacity, and so much that you should no
longer hide the name of him who tempted you to this grievous fall. But he opposes to me,
with the young man's over-softness, albeit wise beyond his years, that it were wronging the very
nature of a human to force her to lay open her heart's secrets in such broad daylight,
and in presence of so great a multitude. Truly, as I sought to convince him, the shame lay in the
commission of the sin, and not in showing of it forth. What say you to it, once again, brother
Dimmesdale? Must it be thou, or I, that shall deal with this poor sinner's soul?
There was a murmur amongst the dignified and revered occupants of the balcony,
and Governor Bellingham gave expression to its porport, speaking in an authoritative voice,
although chambered in respect towards the youthful clergyman whom he addressed.
Good master Dimmesdale, said he, the responsibility of this woman's soul lies greatly with you.
It behoves you, therefore, to exhort her to repentance and to covession,
as a proof and consequence thereof.
The directness of this appeal drew the eyes of the whole crowd upon Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale,
young clergyman who had come from one of the great English universities,
bringing all the learning of the age into our wild forest land. His eloquence and religious
fervour had already given the earnest of high eminence in this profession. He was a person of
very striking aspect, with a white, lofty and impending brow, large brown melancholic eyes,
and a mouth which, unless when he forcibly compressed it, was apt to be tremulous,
expressing both nervous sensibility and the vast power of self-restraint.
Notwithstanding his high native gifts and scholar-like attainments, there was an error
to his young minister, an apprehensive, a startled, a half-frightened look, as of a being
who felt himself quite astray, and at a loss in the pathway of human existence, and could only be
at ease in some seclusion of his own. Therefore, so far as duties would permit, it rode in shadowy by
path, and thus kept itself simple and childlike coming forth, when occasion was, with a freshness
and fragrance and due purity of thought, which, as many people said, affected them like the speech
of an angel. Such was the young man whom the Reverend Mr. Wilson and the Governor had introduced
to openly to the public notice, bidding him speak, in the earring of all men, to that mystery of a
woman's soul so sacred even in its pollution. The trying nature of his position drove the blood from
his cheek, and made his lips tremulous.
Speak to the woman, my brother, said Mr. Wilson. It is a moment to her soul, and therefore,
as the worshipful Governor says, moments to thin own, in whose charge hers is,
exalted to confess the truth. The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale bent his head in silent prayer,
as it seemed, and then came forward.
Esther Pryne, said he, leaning over the balcony, and looking down steadfastly into her eyes.
Thou hearest what this good man says, and seest the accountability under which I labor.
If thou feelest it to be for thy soul's peace, and that thy earthly punishment will thereby
be made more effectual to salvation, I charge thee to speak out the name of thy fellow sinner
and fellow sufferer. Be not silent from any mistaken pity and tenderness for him. For,
believe me, Esther, though he were to step down from a high place, and stand there beside thee,
on thy pedestal of shame, yet better were it so than to hide the guilty heart through life.
What could thou silence do for him? Except tempt him, yeah, compel him, as it were,
to add hypocrisy to sin. Heaven hath granted thee an open ignominy, that thereby thou mayest
work out an open triumph over the evil within thee and sorrow without. Take heed how thou
deniest to him, who, perchance, hath not courage to grasp it for himself, the bitter but wholesome
cup that is now presented to thy lips. The young pastor's voice was tremulous sweet,
rich, deep and broken. The feeling that it so evidently manifested,
rather than the direct purport of the words, caused it to vibrate within all hearts,
and brought listeners into one accord of sympathy. Even the poor baby at Esther's bosom was affected
by the same influence, for it directed easy through the vacant gaze towards Mr. Dimmesdale,
and held up its little arms with a half-pleased, half-plaintive murmur. So powerful seemed the
appeal that people could not believe but that Esther Pryne would speak out a guilty name,
or else that the guilty one himself, in whatever high or lowly place he stood,
would be drawn forth by an inward and inevitable necessity and compelled to ascend the scaffold.
Esther shook her head.
Woman, transgress not beyond the limits of Heaven's mercy, cried Reverend Mr. Wilson,
more harshly than before. That little baby has been gifted with a voice to second and
confirm the counsel which thou hast heard. Speak out a name that, and thy repentance,
may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy breast.
Never, replied Esther Pryne, looking, not at Mr. Wilson, but into the deep and troubled eyes
of the younger clergyman. It is too deeply branded. He cannot take it off,
and would that I might endure his agony as well as mine.
Speak, woman, said another voice, coolly and sternly, proceeding from the crowd about the
scaffold. Speak, and give a child a father. I will not speak, answered Esther, turning pale
but responding to this voice, which she too surely recognized. And my child must seek a Heavenly
Father. She shall never know an earthly one. She will not speak, murmured Mr. Dimmesdale, who,
leaning over the balcony with his hand upon his heart, had waited the result of his appeal.
He now drew back with a long respiration, round to a strength and generosity of a woman's heart.
She will not speak.
Discerning the impracticable state of the poor sculprit's mind,
the elder clergyman, who had carefully prepared himself for the occasion,
addressed to the multitude the discursive scene in all its branches,
but with continual reference to the ignominious letter. So forcibly did he dwell upon this symbol,
for the hour or more during which his periods were rolling over the people's heads,
that it assumed new cherubs in their imagination,
and seemed to derive its scarlet hue from the flames of the infernal pit.
Esther Prine, meanwhile, kept her place upon the pedestal of shame, with glazed eyes,
and an air of weary indifference. She had borne that morning all that nature could endure,
and as her temperament was not of the order that escapes from too intense suffering by a swoon,
her spirit could only shelter itself beneath a stony crust of incessibility,
while the faculties of animal life remained entire. In this state,
the voice of the preacher thundered remorselessly, but unavailingly, upon her ears. The infant,
during the later portion of her ordeal, pursed the air with its wailing and screams.
She strove to hush it mechanically, but seemed scarcely to sympathize with its trouble.
With the same hard meaner, she was led back to prison,
and vanished from the public gaze within its air-clamped portal. It was whispered by those
who peered after her that Scarlet Lara threw a lurid gleam along the dark passageway of the interior.